# Stocks, Flows, and the Degradation of the Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine (or lack thereof)

The idea that supplying the Ukrainian military will degrade Russia’s military has been a prominent justification for Western provision of military aid to Ukraine. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin [claimed](https://www.politico.eu/article/us-ukraine-russia-war-military-help/) in a February 2022 press conference that the United States is aiding Ukraine because it would like to see a “weakened” Russia. The Rand Corporation, in its analysis of the path of the war, [lists](https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA2510-1.html) as a potential benefit of a long war the sustained “weakening” of Russia’s military.  A recent Pentagon [press release](https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3671938/dod-official-restates-why-supporting-ukraine-is-in-us-interest/) ominously notes the deaths of 300,000 Russian soldiers in the war, suggesting that such casualties reduce Russia’s military power and revise the European balance of power in favor of the United States and its allies.

The reasoning behind the hypothesis that extended war in Ukraine makes Russia weaker is simple: if Russia loses people and materiel fighting in Ukraine, then the former will have a smaller and less well-equipped military to fight or threaten future military action. This is an understandable intuition, but I would like to suggest that it is based on **a mistaken understanding of military power as a stock rather than a flow.** 

In economics and accounting, a distinction is drawn between quantities that represent a stock: the amount of something that exists at a fixed point in time; and flows: the rate at which the quantity of something changes over a given period of time. For example, a balance sheet depicts a set of stocks: a snapshot of a business’s assets and liabilities existing at the present. On the other hand, an income statement depicts the amount of money that a business brings in over a certain period of time. A more common-sense example would be the difference between a car’s gas tank fill level and its mileage per gallon. The standard display in cars traditionally shows how much gas the car has in its tank right now (a stock), whereas some modern displays also show how much gas the car is expending based on how it is travelling right now (a flow).

During peacetime, we typically think of military power in terms of stocks.[^1] We count things like a military’s number of active-duty troops or how many tanks and strike fighters it currently possesses. A good reason for this is that during peacetime, that is the usually the only kind of information we have. While militaries can and do construct new systems and recruit new soldiers in order to replace ageing or technologically-out-of-date stocks, or even in order to grow their militaries[^2], such rates represent only the speed that a state requires to replace its stocks as they age out, and not the maximum speed at which a state could in theory replace casualties, destroyed systems, and expended ammunition. For example, although most militarily active states maintain production lines for ammunition, the extent of such production lines represents merely what’s required for topping up minor depletions of peacetime ammunition from expenditures like training exercises—not the maximum amount of ammunition that a state could produce if it was constantly expending massive amounts of ammunition in a war.

While it may be justifiable to resort to using stocks as a heuristic to evaluate states’ military power during periods of peacetime (since reliable information about flows is not available), one should not assume that stocks accurately represent how much military power a state has. One way to build the proper intuitions about this is to look at works of military history. Opening any random military or even general history of a war that took place between two industrialized states, one will rarely find (except at the points in the work describing the beginning of the conflict) information about how many troops and how much ammunition, vehicles, and other military system that a state has at a specific point in time. Instead, historians will typically focus on flows: they will mention facts like how many casualties the state is taking per month and how much materiel its factories are producing to replace destroyed or expended supplies.

I suspect the reason that historians choose to focus on these flow quantities, rather than static stocks, is that in an extended conflict, it is actually the relative balance of flows that influence the outcome of the war. Unless one state is able to force its adversary to capitulate immediately, then the degree of military power that a state possesses over another will be based on how much faster or slower it can replace its casualties and supply new material to the front. Extended industrial combat is typically so costly and destructive that a state’s * *entire* * initial stock of troops and materiel will be destroyed at some point in the war such that the state’s ability to prosecute the war will depend not only (and as time goes on, increasingly not at all) on how big this initial stock was and much more so on how fast it can recruit and equip replacements for exhausted forces. 

In fact, precisely this outcome happened to Russia, with 90% of its initial invasion force [being](https://www.reuters.com/world/us-intelligence-assesses-ukraine-war-has-cost-russia-315000-casualties-source-2023-12-12/) destroyed. But even this scale of destruction was not sufficient to prevent Russia from fighting—because its military had sufficient *flows* to provide new forces to make up the losses.

Once we see how much the flow of militarily relevant quantities of troops and materiel determines the outcomes of war rather than initial stocks, the assumption that reducing a state’s stock of troops or materiel looks less compelling. Even if you can inflict casualties and destroy vehicles, if a state maintains or can develop high enough flow rates to replace these losses, then the casualties and destruction will not actually lower its long-run military power. Unless the state loses enough people and equipment to capitulate, its flow rates can make up for any losses caused at a specific point in time. 

So far, I’ve discussed stocks vs flows as heuristics for military power entirely in the abstract, but my ultimate intention is to apply the distinction to explain why it’s mistaken to think that supplying military aid to Ukraine will make Russia’s military weaker. One reason we can be confident that this view is mistaken is simply that it has already been empirically refuted. Supreme Allied Commander Europe General Christopher G. Cavoli [testified](https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/cavoli_statement.pdf) to Congress in April that Russia’s military is more powerful today than when the war began. General Cavoli’s words are worth quoting in full:

> Russia is on track to command the largest military on the continent and a defense industrial complex capable of generating substantial amounts of ammunition and 93 materiel in support of large-scale combat operations. Regardless of the outcome of the war in Ukraine, Russia will be larger, more lethal, and angrier with the West than when it invaded.

A simple chart tells the same story:

[^1]: A prominent counterexample to this is the CIA World Factbook listing for each state the number of male citizens who turn 18 each year. Although this is impressive and smart, I would argue that such information typically does not make it into policy discourse evaluating the military power of states.

[^2]: Or in the case of a state growing its military—these observations only tell us the speed that a state has decided to execute such growth, and not its maximum potential to produce materiel and recruit new soldiers.

