# Friends and Enemies

If you've ever worked with lots of international[^1] young professionals in an environment like the United Nations, you will have encountered lots of people who have a positive view of American society. Though often shrouded by disdain for granular policies such as our healthcare system, our second amendment, and/or our allegedly excessive levels of military spending, behind these remarks is an attitude of admiration. They understand themselves as citizens of a global community whose heart is located in American urban cores like Los Angeles, Washington, Silicon Valley, and New York. Their tastes and attitudes are modulated by the cultural trends that prevail in these kinds of places. 

In my experience, if you ask these international young professionals why they view American-led globalization as choiceworthy, they will often cite the experience of viewing American movies and TV shows during their adolescence. By far, the most common show I've heard mentioned as part of this experience is *Friends*. While *Friends* may be a relatively outdated piece of 90s nostalgia for citizens of the imperial core, for citizens of the periphery, *Friends* is still a living cultural icon that helps produce young peoples' understandings of the world as they come of age. 

*Friends* covers many aspects of American social life but primarily focues on the social and romantic intruige occuring among affluent young New York professionals in creative and/or high-powered careers. By focusing on this one particular thread of the American social fabric, the writers of *Friends* fail to adumbrate several important pieces of context that could be helpful to a foreign viewer using the show to form an understanding of the United States. In particular:

- A majority of Americans have four or fewer lifetime sexual partners.
- Should one or more of the characters' romantic entanglements prove lasting, it would be very unlikely for those characters to be able to purchase a home and support a family using the incomes provided by their creative and interesting careers. The total fertility rate in Washington, DC was 1.24 in 2022.
- In most of the four core urban areas I mentioned earlier, the murder rate exceeds that of countries like Yemen and Zimbabwe. Using Washington as an example again, the city has a murder rate equal to that of Haiti.
- In a city like New York, the annual ammount spent on sheltering migrants exceeds that of the sanitation budget by a factor of three.

In the spirit of avoiding biased misinformation, I think it could be helpful for streaming services to require foreign viewers to expose themselves to these facts during or after watching *Friends*. But since statistics like the ones I've cited above can be dull and forgettable for audiences seeking entertainment, I propose that Hollywood create another TV show called *Enemies* to be viewed alongside *Friends*. *Enemies* could assist foreign viewers in forming a balanced understanding of the United States by portraying the less savory features of American life that entertainment products like *Friends* sometimes leave out. 

My hope would be that the experience of viewing *Enemies* would inspire citizens of the imperial periphery to be more open to political reform movements in the imperial core. I fear that after watching a show like *Friends*, citizens of the periphery might not be fully equipped to understand these movements and the forces that give rise to them.  

But the people I would really like to address with this post are those who make the following argument: because citizens of the periphery hold positive attitudes towards the United States and often want to move here, we can infer that our social arrangements are good. I believe this argument needs to confront the challenge that the positive attitudes it takes as a premise are induced by slanted portrayals of American life in media like *Friends*. 


[^1]: In using the term "international", I really do mean international. If one uses the term in the way that the American media often uses it: to summarize the views prevailing in Canada, Western Europe, and Scandinavia (roughly the core of the NATO alliance), then my sociological description does not really work. 
